# Public
There are a handful of food related categories in the IRI dataset (Cold Cereal, Frozen Dinners/Entrees, Frozen Pizza, Hotdog, Margarine/Butter, Mayonnaise, Mustard & Ketchup, Peanut Butter, Salty Snacks, Soup, Spaghetti/Italian Sauce, Sugar Substitutes, Yogurt). Some of them are ready-to-serve food categories, such as Frozen Dinners/Entrees, Frozen Pizza, Hotdog, or Soup. Others are more of cooking ingredients, such as Spaghetti/ Italian Sauce, Margarine/Butter, Mayonnaise, Mustard & Ketchup. 

Due to the difference in how items of these categories are used, households with heterogeneous characteristics (Work Hours, Income, Family Size, Marital Status, Age, Education level, Occupation) might favor one group of items over others. In this research project, I would like to investigate the relationship between household income and household wealth and the consumption of various food related categories in the IRI Marketing database. 

To achieve this, I use household-level transaction data for a set of food categories over eight years between 2004 and 2012. Specifically, the IRI BehaviorScan panel data is used to examine how income and wealth affect demand of ready-to-serve food categories such as Frozen Dinners, Frozen Pizza, or Soup and other cooking ingredients such as Spaghetti Sauce. This dataset contains  detailed purchase records of more than 6,070,975 transactions of 13 food related categories in two main BehaviorScan markets -- Eau Claire, Wisconsin and Pittsfield Massachusetts. IRI also published demographic information of households participated in this BehaviorScan Program, which is merged with the panel dataset to investigate the effect of income on consumption. 

To measure wealth, I supplement the IRI BehaviorScan Data with Zillow home value indices at the local ZIP code level. Because housing represents a large portion of household net worth (Iacoviello 2011) and changes in housing value explain most of the cross-sectional variation in household net worth over the course of the 2008 recession, I believe that this is a reasonable proxy for household’s wealth (Mian et al. 2013).  

Hypothesis 1: To the extent that a food category is a normal goods the higher the total household income, the more it is consumed. Similarly, the higher the net worth of the household, the more a certain food category is purchased and ultimately consumed by the household. However, some items might experience a decline in consumption as income or wealth of the household increases such as Frozen Dinners/ Entrees or Frozen Pizza, which are ready-to-serve food categories. The reason being, people with more income might consume healthier fresh ingredients. In this case, these items are inferior goods. In addition, there may be heterogeneity in income elasticity of demand among the categories.

My data covers the years 2004 – 2012, which include several years before and after the Great Recession. During the Great Recession, there were large changes in income and wealth of households over a short-time horizon and these income and wealth changes varied considerably across geographic areas and households (Dube et al 2018). Therefore, I can potentially exploit this variation to estimate the causal effects of income and wealth on household consumptions. Ideally, we can make use of the panel structure of data, analyzing the within-household variation in consumption of different categories associated within-household changes in income and wealth, controlling for a host of other factors including an overall time trend. 

Unfortunately, demographic data provided by IRI is not designed for trending, therefore, at best, we can only establish a cross-sectional comparison between different income groups or investigate the changes in consumption behavior (if there are any) of different income groups over time. The dataset on household wealth obtained from Zillow is, however, variant overtime. Therefore, I can estimate the effect of wealth on consumption of household. 

In the research project, I also want to investigate the effect of work hours on the consumption of ready-to-serve food categories. Work statuses of male and female heads of households can potentially affect the consumption of households via two channels. First, work hours can have an income effect on consumption. More hours worked mean more income, which will allow the household to consumption more of a certain food category. Second, work hours represent the amount of labor that the household is willing to supply. Since there is a trade-off between labor and leisure, the household will have less time reserved for dining if its members work more. Therefore, work hours alter the preferences of households when it comes to dining. 

Hypothesis 2: Work Hours affect the consumption of Consumer Packged Goods. To the extent that female member of the household cook more frequently than their partner, the estimated impact of work hours of female member on the consumption of different food categories is more significant economically and statistically than that of their male member.

Hypothesis 3: There may be heterogeneity in the impacts of work hours across different food categories. For instance, the more hours members of a household work, the more that household consumes ready-to-serve foods such as Frozen Dinners or Frozen Piazza. It remains unclear how that household consumes cooking ingredients and other food items. That is the reason why I want to investigate this particular question. However, as mentioned earlier, work hours also have an income effect on consumption of ready-to-serve food categories, the sign, magnitude, and significance of the effect of work hours cannot be anticipated a priori. 

Hypothesis 4: I suspect that work hours, when interacted with other characteristics of households (income categories, family size, education, marital status, etc.) will show heterogeneous impacts on households’ consumption of different items. For instance, the effect of work hours on consumption of ready-to-serve food items might increase with the family size of a household because adult members of that household might have to spend more time taking care of their family.

As mentioned earlier, the IRI BehavirorScan data covers the years 2004 – 2012, which include several years before and after the Great Recession. During the Great Recession, there were large changes in income and wealth of households over a short-time horizon and these income and wealth changes varied considerably across geographic areas and households (Dube et al 2018). Therefore, I also want to investigate the cyclical nature of the consumption of ready-to-serve food items of heterogeneous households. 

There are two possible transmission channels through which business cycles can affect sales of a food/drink item. First is the supply channel. In an economic downturn, there might be less supply of goods due to a decline in production. In the case of food and beverage categories in groceries stores, there might be less categories available to consumers. For each category, there might be less items in stock. These forces lead to less sales of most, if not all, categories. The second channel is demand. Demand, in turn, is driven by own preferences, income and wealth. 

Hypothesis 5: The consumption of ready-to-serve food categories is procyclical, meaning a recession results in a decrease in consumption of ready-to-serve food categories, given decreased supply and decreased demand induced by less work hours and lower productivity. In an economic boom, there is an increase in consumption due to a surge in supply of these items, and increased demand due to more work hours and higher productivity. 
However, this income effect may be countervailed by a substitution effect which might make the consumption of ready-to-serve food items acyclical or even countercyclical. Less work hours and lower productivity in an economic downturn result in falling incomes for households, which in turn may incentivize them to consume more packaged ready-to-serve foods relative to other more expensive fresh ingredients. This hypothesis resonates with the inverse relationship between income and consumption of ready-to-serve food presented in hypothesis 1. In addition, according to Cha et el (2015), a recession might result in more non-market time, which might be allocated to preparing food at home and shopping.
