
In the IRI Marketing dataset for Consumer Packaged Goods (CPGs), there are thirteen food related categories, which include cold cereal, frozen dinners or entrees, frozen pizza, hotdog, margarine or butter, mayonnaise, mustard and ketchup, peanut butter, salty snacks, soup, spaghetti sauce, sugar substitutes, and yogurt. Some of them are ready-to-serve food categories, such as frozen dinners or entrees, frozen pizza, hotdog, or soup. Others are more of cooking ingredients, such as spaghetti sauce, margarine or butter, mayonnaise, mustard and ketchup. 

Due to the difference in how items of these categories are used or consumed, households with heterogeneous characteristics such as work hours, income, family size, marital status, age, education level, occupation may favor one set of items over others. In other words, heterogeneous households may have different consumption patterns of packaged food. In this paper, I investigate the relationship between household income, household wealth, household labor supply, and the consumption of various ready-to-serve food categories in the IRI Marketing database. In addition, I would like to investigate the variations of household consumption of these food categories over the Great Recession. 

Investigating the consumption of packaged food of heterogeneous households has far-reaching policy implications. Policymakers may want to understand the consumption patterns of low-income low-wealth households in order to have appropriate food assistance programs that ensure the sufficiency of nutrients. Understanding the effects of work hours on household consumption and the cyclical nature of household consumption of packaged food categories allows legislators and the federal, state and local government to 
act swiftly in response to an economic downturn with programs such as stimulus payment or SNAP to ensure that people have access to food in dire times. 

To achieve this, I use household-level transaction data for a set of food categories over eight years between 2004 and 2012. Specifically, the IRI BehaviorScan panel data is used to examine how income and wealth affect demand of ready-to-serve food categories such as frozen dinners, frozen pizza, or soup and other cooking ingredients such as spaghetti sauce. This dataset contains  detailed purchase records of more than 6,070,975 transactions of thirteen food related categories in two main BehaviorScan markets -- Eau Claire, Wisconsin and Pittsfield, Massachusetts. IRI also publishes demographic information of households participated in this BehaviorScan Program, which is merged with the panel dataset to investigate the effect of income on consumption. 

To measure wealth, I supplement the IRI BehaviorScan Data with Zillow home value indices at the local ZIP code level. Because housing represents a large portion of household net worth (Iacoviello 2011) and changes in housing value explain most of the cross-sectional variation in household net worth over the course of the 2008 recession, I believe that this is a reasonable proxy for household’s wealth (Mian et al. 2013).  
My data covers the years 2004 – 2012, which include several years before and after the Great Recession. During the Great Recession, there were large changes in income and wealth of households over a short-time horizon and these income and wealth changes varied considerably across geographic areas and households (Dube et al 2018). Therefore, I can potentially exploit this variation to estimate the causal effects of income and wealth on household consumptions. As mentioned previously, unfortunately, demographic data provided by IRI is not designed for trending, therefore, only a cross-sectional comparison between different income groups can be established. The evidence of income effects in this paper, if there is any, is more suggestive than causal. The dataset on household wealth obtained from Zillow is, however, variant overtime. Therefore, I can estimate the effect of wealth on consumption of household.

In obtaining results of my investigations, I acknowledge that I cannot account for granular unobserved responses of retailers, manufacturers, and local markets and heterogeneous response by households even when I include time fixed effects and state fixed effects in the models. This study attempts to illustrate the heterogeneity in the consumption behaviors of households in the CPGs industry and whether the consumption patterns change during a recession. Given the time constraint, I leave more sophisticated analysis to future research. 

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses theory and insights from past literature. In section 3, I describe my data sets, measurement, and descriptive statistics. In section 4, I examine the effects of household income and wealth on consumption of ready-to-serve food categories. In section 5, we examine the effects of household work hours on consumption of ready-to-serve food categories. Section 6 investigates the cyclicality of household consumption of ready-to-serve food categories. I conclude with a summary of findings and potential future research in section 7.